[Edit] Python: unittest-module (#6621)
Codecademy/docs: content/python/concepts/unittest-module/unittest-module.md

  - 'paths/computer-science'
---

> Python **`unittest`** [module](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/python/modules) is a built-in testing [framework](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/general/framework) that provides a set of tools for testing our code's functionality in a more systematic and automated way. It supports creating and running [unit tests](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/general/unit-testing), helping developers catch bugs early and ensure code reliability. Similar to unit testing frameworks in other languages, `unittest` allows for the following features:
> 
> - Automation of test execution
> - Setup and teardown functionality for preparing and cleaning up before/after tests
> - Grouping of tests into test suites

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Python **`unittest`** [module](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/python/modules) is a built-in testing [framework](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/general/framework) that provides a set of tools for testing code's functionality in a more systematic and automated way. It supports creating and running [unit tests](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/general/unit-testing), helping developers catch bugs early and ensure code reliability. Similar to unit testing frameworks in other languages, `unittest` allows for the following features:

- Automation of test execution
- Setup and teardown functionality for preparing and cleaning up before/after tests
- Grouping of tests into test suites
```

  def test_get_balance(self):
    self.assertEqual(self.account.get_balance(), 100)

if __name__ == '__main__':
    unittest.main()
```

In the test cases:

- `setUp()`: Creates an account with `owner='Alice'` and initial balance of `100`.
- `test_deposit()`: Tests depositing a valid amount (`50`) updates the balance to `150`.
- `test_withdraw()`: Tests withdrawing `30` correctly reduces the balance to `70`.
- `test_withdraw_insufficient_funds()`: Ensures withdrawing more than available (`200`) raises a `ValueError`.
- `test_deposit_negative_amount()`: Ensures depositing a negative amount raises a `ValueError`.
- `test_get_balance()`: Verifies the balance remains unchanged initially (`100`).

## Best Practices for Using `unittest` Module

- Use `setUp()` for repeated setup code instead of duplicating it in each test.
- Name test methods clearly to describe what’s being tested.
- Keep tests isolated—each test should not depend on another.
- Avoid testing multiple concerns in one test method.
- Run tests frequently during development, not just before deployment.
- Use descriptive assertion messages (e.g., `self.assertEqual(a, b, "Area calculation failed")`) for easier debugging.

> ## Frequently Asked Questions
> 
> ### 1. Which is better, `pytest` or `unittest`?
> 
> `unittest` is built into Python and follows an object-oriented approach. It is ideal for small to medium-sized projects.
> `pytest` is a third-party framework that offers more concise syntax, better error messages, and additional plugins, making it a popular choice for larger projects.
> 
> ### 2. What does `unittest.main()` do?
> 
> `unittest.main()` launches the test runner, automatically discovering all test methods in the file and executing them. It also provides a command-line interface to control test behavior (e.g., verbosity).
> 
> ### 3. What does `if __name__ == '__main__'` mean in Python?
> 
> This statement ensures that code inside it runs only when the script is executed directly, not when it’s imported as a module. It's commonly used to run test scripts or demo code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Frequently Asked Questions

### 1. Which is better, `pytest` or `unittest`?

`unittest` is built into Python and follows an object-oriented approach. It is ideal for small to medium-sized projects.
`pytest` is a third-party framework that offers more concise syntax, better error messages, and additional plugins, making it a popular choice for larger projects.

### 2. What does `unittest.main()` do?

`unit test.main()` launches the test runner, which automatically discovers and executes all test methods in the file. It also provides a command-line interface to control test behavior (e.g., verbosity).

### 3. What does `if __name__ == '__main__'` mean in Python?

This statement ensures that the code inside runs only when the script is executed directly, not when it’s imported as a module. It's commonly used to run test scripts or demo code.
```
